### 1. 학습 날짜

- 2021-01-13(수)

### 2. 학습시간

- 09:00 ~ 11:00 (자가)
- 19:00 ~ 22:00 (자가)

### 3. 학습 범위 및 주제

- netwhat

### 4. 동료 학습 방법

- 해당 사항 없음

### 5. 학습 목표

- netwhat 을 위한 네트워크 공부 및 하고싶은 것 하기

### 6. 상세 학습 내용

- IP 와 IP address 가 다르다는 것을 깨닳았다!
- project pdf 에서는 IP address 가 무엇인지가 먼저 나오지만 나는 IP 를 먼저 보고 싶었다

#### [wiki: Internet Protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Protocol)

- The Internet Protocol (IP) is the principal communications protocol in the Internet protocol suite for relaying datagrams across network boundaries.
- Its routing function enables internetworking, and essentially establishes the Internet.
- IP has the task of delivering packets from the source host to the destination host based on the IP addresses in the packet headers.
- For this purpose, IP defines packet structures that encapsulate the data to be delivered.
- It also defines addressing methods that are used to label the datagram with source and destination information.
- IPv4: Internet Protocol Version 4
- The Internet Protocol is responsible for addressing host interfaces, encapsulating data into datagrams (including fragmentation and reassembly) and routing datagrams from a source host interface to a destination host interface across one or more IP networks.
  - A network interface controller (NIC, also known as a network interface card, network adapter, LAN adapter or physical network interface and by similar terms) is a computer hardware component that connects a computer to a computer network.
- For these purposes, the Internet Protocol defines the format of packets and provides an addressing system.
- Each datagram has two components: a header and a payload.
- The IP header includes source and destination IP addresses, and other metadata needed to route and deliver the datagram.
- This method of nesting the data payload in a packet with a header is called encapsulation.
- IP addressing entails the assignment of IP addresses and associated parameters to host interfaces.
- The address space is divided into subnetworks, involving the designation of network prefixes.
- IP routing is performed by all hosts, as well as routers, whose main function is to transport packets across network boundaries.
- Routers communicate with one another via specially designed routing protocols, either interior gateway protocols or exterior gateway protocols.
- Reliability
  - The design of the Internet protocol suite adheres to the end-to-end principle, a concept adapted from the CYCLADES project.
    - Under the end-to-end principle, the network infrastructure is considered inherently unreliable at any single network element or transmission medium and is dynamic in terms of the availability of links and nodes.
    - No central monitoring or performance measurement facility exists that tracks or maintains the state of the network.
    - For the benefit of reducing network complexity, the intelligence in the network is purposely located in the end nodes.
  - As a consequence of this design, the Internet Protocol only provides best-effort delivery and its service is characterized as unreliable.

#### [wiki: Host (network)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Host_(network)

- A network host is a computer or other device connected to a computer network.
- Hosts are assigned at least one network address (Network address: An identifier for a node or host on a telecommunications network.).

#### [wiki: Datagram](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Datagram)

- RFC 1594: A self-contained, independent entity of data carrying sufficient information to be routed from the source to the destination computer without reliance of earlier exchanges between this source and destination computer and the transporting network.
- The Internet Protocol (IP) defines standards for several types of datagrams.

#### [wiki: End-to-end principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/End-to-end_principle)

- The end-to-end principle is a design framework in computer networking.
- In networks designed according to this principle, application-specific features reside in the communicating end nodes of the network, rather than in intermediary nodes, such as gateways and routers, that exist to establish the network.
- Concept
  - The fundamental notion behind the end-to-end principle is that for two processes communicating with each other via some communication means, the reliability obtained from that means cannot be expected to be perfectly aligned with the reliability requirements of the processes.

#### [wiki: Subnetwork](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subnetwork)

- A subnetwork or subnet is a logical subdivision of and IP network.
- The practice of dividing a network into two or more networks is called subnetting.
- Computers that belong to a subnet are addressed with an identical most-significant bit-group in their IP addresses.
- For IPv4, a network may also be characterized by its subnet mask or netmask, which is the bitmask that when applied by a bitwise AND operation to any IP address in the network, yields the routing prefix.
- Subnet masks are also expressed in dot-decimal notation like an address.
- For example, 255.255.255.0 is the subnet mask for the prefix 198.51.100.0/24.

#### transport vs transfer vs transmit

- transport: 물리적으로 A 에서 B 로 운송
- transfer: A 에서 B 로 전송, 전달
- transmit: 도착지가 어딘진 모르지만 방출

#### 간단한 git author 관리

- 최근 컴퓨터를 바꿨더니 author 가 이전과 달라진 것을 확인

```zsh
% git config --global user.name "user name"
% git config --global user.email example@example.com
```

- 위 코드로 이름과 이메일을 바꿀 수 있다
- 또는 `~/.gitconfig` 에서 직접 `[user]` 의 `name` 과 `email` 을 바꿔도 된다. 그리고 `#` 로 주석처리가 된 것은 아닌지 확인하도록 하자

### 7. 학습 내용에 대한 개인적인 총평

오늘도 많은 양을 공부한 것은 아닙니다. 네트워크는 원래 잘 몰랐던 부분이기도 하고 진입점이 애매해서 평소에 접근하기가 힘들었는데 지금도 학습이 쉽지는 않은 것 같습니다. 그래도 잘 모르더라도 계속 쭉 읽다보면 조금씩 네트워크에 대해 알게되는 것 같습니다. OSI 보다 정말 TCP/IP layer 가 더 직관적이고 이해하기가 쉬운 것 같습니다.

### 8. 다음 학습 계획

- netwhat 공부하기
  - IP address
  - Netmask
  - What is the subnet of an IP with Netmask
  - What is the broadcast address of a subnet
  - What are the different ways to represent an ip address with the Netmask
  - What are the differences between public and private IPs 
  - What is a class of IP addresses
  - DHCP server
  - DHCP protocol
  - What are the rules to make 2 devices communicate using IP addresses
  - How does routing work with IP
  - What is a default gateway for routing
  - What is a port from an IP point of view and what is it used for when conneting to another device
- get\_next\_line
- printf
