### 1. 학습 날짜

- 2021-01-15(금)

### 2. 학습시간

- 10:00 ~ 12:30 (자가)
- 19:00 ~ 21:10 (자가)

### 3. 학습 범위 및 주제

- netwhat
  - IP address

### 4. 동료 학습 방법

- 해당 사항 없음

### 5. 학습 목표

- netwhat 을 위한 네트워크 공부 및 하고 싶은 것 하기

### 6. 상세 학습 내용

- 오랜만에 터미널 환경을 건들여 보았다

```zsh
% variable=value
% unset variable
% set | wc -l
     167
% alias variable=value
% unalias variable
% alias | wc -l
      16
```

- unset 으로 변수를 없앨 수 있다
- set 은 모든 변수 목록을 출력한다
- alias 도 set 과 비슷하게 동작한다
- shell script 에서 변수나 alias 와 관련된 작업을 할 때는 script 를 호출하는 다양한 방법 중 source 커맨드를 사용하는 것이 좋다. 그래야 변수나 alias 가 script 를 실행한 터미널에 동일하게 적용된다

#### [IP address](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_address)

- An IP address is a numerical label assigned to each device connected to a network that uses the IP for communication.
- An IP address serves two main functions.
  - Host or network interface identification and location addressing.
- IPv4 (IP version 4) defines an IP address as a 32-bit number.
- IPv6 uses 128 bits for the IP address.
- example of notation
  - IPv4: 172.16.254.1
    - 10 진법 표기에 숫자 하나당 1 byte 로 4 개의 숫자
  - IPv6: 2001:db8:0:1234:0:567:8:1
    - 16 진법 표기에 숫자 하나당 2 byte 로 8 개의 숫자
- The size of the routing prefix of the address is designated in CIDR notation by suffixing the address with the number of significant bits, e.g., 192.168.1.15/24, which is equivalent to the historically used subnet mask 255.255.255.0.
- [superuser: What does a forward slash followed by a number mean in IP?](https://superuser.com/questions/1163565/what-does-a-forward-slash-followed-by-a-number-mean-in-ip)
  - `/24` says that first 24 bits are used for network designation, while last 8 bits are used for various hosts inside that network
  - In this case, the range of IP is x.x.x.1 - x.x.x.255.
  - 255 IP being used as broadcast address for the netwrok.
- Network administrators assign an IP address to each device connected to a network.
- Such assignments may be on a static (fixed or permanent) or dynamic basis, depending on network practices and software features.
- IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force)
- IP versions
  - Today, these two versions IP are in simultaneous use.
  - Because of historical prevalence of IPv4, the generic term IP address typically still refers to the addresses defined by IPv4.
  - Other versions v1 to v9 were define, but only v4 and v6 ever gained widespread use.
- Subnetworks
  - IP networks may be devided into subnetworks in both IPv4 and IPv6.
  - For this purpose, an IP address is recognized as consisting of two parts.
    - The network prefix in the high-order bits and the remaing bits called the rest field, host identifier, or interface identifier (IPv6), used for host numbering within a network.
  - The subnet mask or CIDR notation determines how the IP address is devided into network and host parts.
  - The subnet mask term is only used whithin IPv4.
  - Both IP version however use the CIDR concept and notation.
  - The first n bits of the IP address indicate the network and subnet.
- IPv4
  - Some addresses are reserved for special purposes such as private networks (~18 million addresses) and multicast addressing (~270 million addresses).

|Class|Leading<br />bits|Size of network<br />number bit field|Number<br />of Networks|
| :-: | :-------------: | :---------------------------------: | :-------------------: |
| A   | 0               | 8                                   | 2^7                   |
| B   | 10              | 16                                  | 2^14                  |
| C   | 110             | 24                                  | 2^21                  |
> Historical classful network architecture

  - Classful network
    - The first three bits of the most significant octet of an IP address were defined as the class of the address.
	- The class system of the address space was replaced with Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) in 1993.
	- Today, remnants of classful network concepts function only in a limited scope as the default configuration parameter of the some network software and hardware components (e.g. netmask), and the technical jargon used in network administrator's discussion.
  - CIDR is based on variable-length subnet masking (VLSM) to allow allocation and routing based on arbitrary-length prefixes.
  - Private addresses
    - All Internet hosts's IP address are not always necessary to be unique as private networks developed and public address space needed to be conserved.
    - Today, such private networks are widely used and typically connect to the Internet with NAT (network address translation), when needed.
	- Three non-overlapping ranges of IPv4 addresses for private networks are reserved.

### 7. 학습 내용에 대한 개인적인 총평

IP address 를 공부했습니다. 아직 IPv4 만 보고 IPv6 는 아직 못봤습니다. 실제 동작 같이 깊게 공부하고 있지는 않고 개념적으로 공부했습니다. md 파일에 `<br />` 같은 html 태그도 사용할 수 있다는 것을 확실히 알았습니다.

### 8. 다음 학습 계획

- netwhat 공부하기
  - IP address
    - IPv6
  - Netmask
  - What is the subnet of an IP with Netmask
  - What is the broadcast address of a subnet
  - What are the different ways to represent an ip address with the Netmask
  - What are the differences between public and private IPs
  - What is a class of IP addresses
  - DHCP server
  - DHCP protocol
  - What are the rules to make 2 devices communicate using IP addresses
  - How does routing work with IP
  - What is a default gateway for routing
  - What is a port from an IP point of view and what is it used for when conneting to another device
- get\_next\_line
- printf
