### 1. 학습 날짜

- 2021-01-16(토)

### 2. 학습시간

- 13:20 ~ 19:00 (자가)

### 3. 학습 범위 및 주제

- netwhat
  - IP address
- get\_next\_line

### 4. 동료 학습 방법

- 해당 사항 없음

### 5. 학습 목표

- 네트워크 공부하기
- get\_next\_line 하기

### 6. 상세 학습 내용

#### [wiki: IP addresses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_address)

- IPv6
  - IPv6 is deemed having sufficient for the foreseeable future.
  - The intent of the new design was not to provide just a sufficient quantity of addresses, but also redesign routing in the Internet by allowing more efficient aggregation of subnetwork routing prefixes.
    - This resulted in slower growth of routing tables in routers.
  - With a large address space, there is no need to have complex address conservation methods as used in CIDR.
  - All modern desktop and enterprise server operating systems include native support for the IPv6 protocol, but it is not yet widely deployed in ohter devices, such as residential networking routers, voice over IP (VoIP) and multimedia equipment, and some networking heardware.
  - Private addresses
    - Just as IPv4 reserves addresses for private networks, blocks of addresses are set aside in IPv6.
	- In IPv6, these are referred to as unique local addresses (ULAs).
	- The routing prefix fc00::/7 is reserved for this block, which is divided into two /8 blocks with different implied policies.
	  - The addresses include a 40-bit pseudorandom number that minimizes the risk of address collisions if sites merge or packets are misrouted.
	- Early practices used a different block for this purpose (fec0::), however, this address type was abandoned and must not be used in new system.
    - Addresses starting with fe80::, called link-local addresses, are assigned to interfaces for communication on the attached link.
	  - The addresses are automatically generated by the operating system for each network interface.
	  - This provides instant and automatic communication between all IPv6 hosts on a link.
	  - This feature is used in the lower layers of IPv6 network administration, such as for the Neighbor Discovery Protocol.
	- Private and link-local address prefixes may not be routed on the public Internet.
- IP address assignment
  - IP addresses are assigned to a host either dynamically as they join the network, or persistently by configuration of the host hardware or software.
    - Persistent configuration is also known as using a static IP address.
	- In contrast, when a computer's IP address is assigned each time it restarts, this is known as using a dynamic IP address.
  - DHCP
    - Dynamic IP addresses are assigned by network using Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP).
    - DHCP is the most frequently used technology for assigning addresses.
	- It also allows devices to share the limited address space on a network if only some of them are online at a particular time.
	- The address assigned with DHCP is associated with a lease and usually has an expiration period.
	- If the lease is not renewed by the host before expiry, the address may be assigned to another device.
	- Some DHCP implementations attempt to reassign the same IP address to a host, based on its MAC address, each time it joins the network.
	- A network administrator may configure DHCP by allocating specific IP addresses based on MAC address.
	- DHCP is not the only technology used to assign IP addresses dynamically.
	- Bootstrap Protocol is a similar protocol and predecessor to DHCP.
  - Computers and equipment used for the network infrastructure, such as routers and mail servers, are typically configured with static addressing.
  - In the absence or failure of static or dynamic address configurations, an operating system may assign a link-local address to a host using stateless address autoconfiguration.
  - In IPv6, every interface, whether using static or dynamic address assignments, also receives a link-local address automatically in the block fe80::/10.
    - These addresses are only valid on the link, such as a local network segment or point-to-point connection, to which a host is connected.
	- These addresses are not routable and, like private addresses, cannot be the source or destination of packets traversing the Internet.
  - Addressing conflicts
    - An IP address conflict occurs when two devices on the same local physical or wireless network claim to have the same IP address.
	- A second assignment of an address generally stops the IP functinality of one or both of the devices.
	- Many modern os notify the administrator of IP address conflicts.
	- When IP addresses are assigned by multiple people and systems with differing methods, any of them may be at fault.

#### [conserve VS reserve vs preserve](https://www.englishforums.com/English/ConservePreserveReserve/xvvnj/post.htm)

- Conserve is to protectively manage a resource. It may imply using it, but carefully.
  - I have conserved my fortune by not spending it on junk.
- Reserve is to set aside, to keep for a later time of use.
  - I have reserved a part of my fortune to pay for college.
- Preserve is to keep intact, without change.
  - I have preserved my fortune by burying it in a jar in the backyard.

#### [StackExchange: How to run aliases commands in inside the vim editor?](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/550622/how-to-run-aliases-commands-in-inside-the-vim-editor)

- Aliases are not inherited.
- To run a command alliased within Vim, that command has to be available as an external command (e.g. a script somewhere in your `$PATH`), or may use a seperate `$BASH_ENV` file (a file that is read before running anything in a non-interactive shell)
- Bash doesn't load `.bashrc` unless it's interactive.
- `:set shellcmdflag=-ic` will set to interactive for the current session.
- 이 방법으로 vim 을 호출한 shell 의 alias command 를 사용할 수는 있으나 우아한 해결책은 아닌 것 같다

#### get\_next\_line

- pdf 를 다 읽어보니 bonus 파트가 새로운 것을 만드는 것이 아니었고, 슬랙도 뒤져보니 보너스에 맞춰 프로그램을 만든 후 이를 복사하여 mandatory 파트를 구성하는 경우가 많은 듯 했다
  - 주의 사항: 복붙 후 #include 가 제대로 되었는지 확인해야만 한다
- static 변수를 하나로 변경
- 헤더 파일에 list 추가

### 7. 학습 내용에 대한 개인적인 총평

오늘은 IPv6 를 보고 routing 도 보려니 힘들어서 get\_next\_line 코딩을 했습니다. libft 를 할 때는 노는 생각을 안하고 싶어서 안놀았는데 요즘엔 쉴 때 조금 놀았더니 놀거에 대한 생각이 나는 것 같기도 합니다. 생활 패턴도 꽤나 망가졌습니다. 또 libft 를 할 때는 자신있는 코딩 영역이라 열심히 했는데 netwhat 은 보면 볼수록 많이 익숙해지는게 느껴지지만 실제 뭘 만드는게 아니고 책보고 공부하는 식이라 거부감이 있습니다. 슬슬 타이밍을 봐서 libft defense 를 해야겠습니다. 일찍 자야 맞는 것 같은데 놀고 싶은 생각이 듭니다.

### 8. 다음 학습 계획

- netwhat 공부하기
  - IP address
  - Netmask
  - What is the subnet of an IP with Netmask
  - What is the broadcast address of a subnet
  - What are the different ways to represent an ip address with the Netmask
  - What are the differences between public and private IPs
  - What is a class of IP addresses
  - DHCP server
  - DHCP protocol
  - What are the rules to make 2 devices communicate using IP addresses
  - How does routing work with IP
  - What is a default gateway for routing
  - What is a port from an IP point of view and what is it used for when conneting to another device
- get\_next\_line
- libft 평가 받기
